%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% Some Headers

Title: Web Services REST-Style: Universal Identifiers, Formats & Protocols

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% Some Extra CSS 

%css 
  
table { width: 100%; }
th    { text-align: left; }

table#restspeak th:nth-child(1) { width: 20%; }
table#restspeak th:nth-child(2) { width: 5%; }
table#restspeak th:nth-child(3) { width: 20%; }
table#restspeak th:nth-child(4) { width: 5%; }
table#restspeak th:nth-child(5) { width: 50%; }

table#restspeak2 th:nth-child(1) { width: 20%; }
table#restspeak2 th:nth-child(2) { width: 80%; }

%end

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% Let's go.

{{ gradient blue aqua blue aqua  }}

h1. Web Services REST-Style<br>Universal Identifiers, Formats & Protocols

Agenda

* What's REST?
* Universal Identifiers, Formats & Protocols 
* The Holy REST Trinity - Noun, Verbs, Types
* REST Design Principles 
* Architecture Astronaut REST Speak

---
fn1. {{ source text='Textile Source' }}

{{ help }}


h1(fullscreen). Part 1 - What's REST?

{{ gradient silver white silver white }}


h1. What's REST?

{{ gradient yellow orange yellow orange }}

Representational State Transfer (REST) - Meaningless Acronym? Wordplay?

bq. rest - n. - peace, ease, or refreshment resulting from the insight that the web works

No matter what vendors tell you - no need to "Light Up the Web" - relax - built on an *open architecture using universal identifiers, formats & protocols and _evolving_ open standards* - no need to reinvent the wheel and sign-up for single-vendor offerings.



h1. What's REST? (Cont'd)

{{ gradient yellow orange yellow orange }}

{% left %}

h3. Narrow Definition

Alternative to BigCo Web Services:

* SOAP(Simple Object Access Protocol)
* WS(Web Service Specs)-*)[1] and
* RPC(Remote Procedure Call)-Style Web Services (XML(Extensible Markup Language)-RPC(Remote Procedure Call))

{% end %}

{% right %}

h3. Broad Definition

Best Practices for Designing Web Services for a Unified Human and Programable Web

{% end %}

fn1. WS-* =  Web Service Specs including WS-Transfer, WS-Addressing, WS-Eventing,
WS-Security, WS-Federation, WS-Trust, and many more.

%begin
h3. Resource, Representation, State, Transfer

* (Stateless) Resource Representation -> Open Format + Identifier e.g. HTML(HyperText Markup Language) + URI(Uniform Resource Identifier)
* Transfer Rules (Protocol) e.g. HTTP(HyperText Transfer Protocol)
%end


h1(fullscreen). Part 2 - Universal Identifiers, Formats & Protocols

{{ gradient silver white silver white }}


h1. Universal Identifiers, Formats & Protocols<br>The Holy Trinity

{{ gradient green lime green lime }}

{% left %}

{% step %}

h3. Identifiers

* URLs (Uniform Resource Locator)
* URIs (Uniform Resource Identifier)

{% end %}

{% step %}

h3. Formats

* HTML (HyperText Markup Language)
* XML (Extensible Markup Language)

{% end %}

{% end %}

{% right %}

{% step %}

h3. Protocols

* HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol)
* AtomPub (Atom Publishing Protocol)  

{% end %}

{% end %}


h1. The Holy REST Trinity - Noun, Verbs, Types

{{ gradient green lime green lime }}

table(#restspeak).
|_. REST-Speak |_.      |_. Internet-Speak   |_.      |_. Plain Old English |
| Verbs        | &hArr; | Protocols          | &hArr; | Communication & Data Exchange Rules  |
| Nouns        | &hArr; | Identifiers        | &hArr; | Names, Addresses |
| Types        | &hArr; | Formats            | &hArr; | Documents, Feeds, Photos, Videos, Music, etc. |

&nbsp;

table(#restspeak2).
|_. REST-Speak |_. Examples  |
| Verbs        | &rArr; HTTP(HyperText Transfer Protocol) GET, POST, PUT, DELETE |
| Nouns        | &rArr; @flickr.com/photos/tag/wien@, @deli.cio.us/tag/wien@, etc. |
| Types        | &rArr; HTML(HyperText Markup Language), RSS(Really Simple Syndication), PNG(Portable Network Graphics), etcetera |


h1(fullscreen). Part 3 - Design Principles & Architecture

{{ gradient silver white silver white }}


h1. REST Design Principles 

{{ gradient red orange red orange }}

* Idenifiers Matter &rArr; Choose Great Names
* Open Formats Matter &rArr; Avoid Vendor Lock-In
* Protocols Matter &rArr; Learn more about HTTP and Use Best Practices
**  Use HTTP GET for Read-Only/Side-Effect-Free Requests
**  Use HTTP Accept Headers for Format Selection
**  Use Full HTTP Method Vocabulary (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE)

* No Web without Linking and No Linking without Identifiers!
* (Stateless) Resource Representation &rArr; Open Format + Identifier e.g. HTML(HyperText Markup Language) + URI(Uniform Resource Identifier)


h1. Architecture Astronaut REST Speak

{{ gradient red orange red orange }}

* REST-y
* REST-ful

* Resource-Oriented Architecure (ROA)
* Web-Oriented Architecure (WOA)

* REST-RPC-Hybrid - Three Web Service Architectures:
## REST
## REST-RPC Hybrid
## RPC[1]

fn1. RPC = Remote Procedure Call


h1(fullscreen). The End - Thank You

{{ gradient silver white silver white }}

{{ google_analytics code=UA-397343-10 }}