%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% Some Headers

Title: Slide Show (S9) 10-Minute Tutorial


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% Let's go.

h1. Slide Show (S9) 10-Minute Tutorial

{{ gradient yellow orange yellow orange }}

Agenda

* What's Slide Show (S9)? 
* Wiki-Style Markup Language - Markdown, Textile
* How it works - Just press F11! 
* What's Opera Show? What's FullerScreen?
* What's S5? What's S6?
* Gradient Themes Using "Loss-Free" Vector Graphics in S9 
* Turn Your Online Wiki Pages into Slide Shows - Sputnik Case Study

---
fn1. {{ source text='Textile Source' }}

{{ help }}


h1. What's Slide Show (S9)?

{{ gradient silver white silver white }}

h3. What? 

A Free Web Alternative to PowerPoint and KeyNote in Ruby


h3. Getting Started in 1-2-3 Easy Steps

*(step) Step 1: Author your slides in plain text using a wiki-style markup language
*(step) Step 2: Generate your slide show using the @slideshow@ gem
*(step) Step 3: Open up your slide show in your browser and hit the space bar to flip through your slides
*(step) That's it. Showtime!


h1. Wiki-Style Markup Language - Markdown, Textile

{{ gradient blue aqua blue aqua  }}

Lets you create slide shows and author slides in plain text using a wiki-style markup language that's easy-to-write and easy-to-read. Sample:

{{{
What's Slide Show (S9)?
=======================

### What? 

A Free Web Alternative to PowerPoint and KeyNote in Ruby

### Getting Started in 1-2-3 Easy Steps

- Step 1: Author your slides in plain text using a wiki-style markup language
- Step 2: Generate your slide show using the `slideshow` gem
- Step 3: Open up your slide show in your browser 
- That's it. Showtime!
}}}

or

{{{
h1. What's Slide Show (S9)?

h3. What? 

A Free Web Alternative to PowerPoint and KeyNote in Ruby

h3. Getting Started in 1-2-3 Easy Steps

* Step 1: Author your slides in plain text using a wiki-style markup language
* Step 2: Generate your slide show using the @slideshow@ gem
* Step 3: Open up your slide show in your browser
* That's it. Showtime!
}}}



h1. How it works - Just press F11!  

{{ gradient red orange red orange }}

The Slide Show (S9) Ruby gem turns your slides in plain text into a web page 
that's an all-in-one-page handout and a live slide show all at once.

{{{
$ slideshow tutorial

=> Preparing slide show 'tutorial.html'...
=> Done.
}}}


Turn your web page into a slide show and your browser into full screen projection
with a single push button (F11).  Hit the space bar or the right arrow, down arrow
  or page down key to flip through your slides.
 
That's all. It's that simple.

h1. Slide Show (S9) Template Pack Options 

{{ gradient yellow white yellow white }}

{% left %} 

h2. What's Opera Show?

Opera has been shipping with built-in full screen projection and slide show support for years (since Opera 4)! 
Pioneered the concept using Cascading Style Sheets (CSS2) that offer/include 
the @projection@ media type in addition to @screen@, @print@ or @handheld@, for example.

{% end %} 

{% right %} 

h2. What's FullerScreen?

FullerScreen is a free, open source Firefox addon that lets you turn your web page into a 
slide show and your browser into full screen projection with a single push button (F11).

{% step %} 

FullerScreen - More than just full screen projection:

* Built-in slide manager with thumbnails!
* Use spacebar, arrows, page up/down keys to move between slides/steps
* Use top and end keys to move to first/last slide
* Move mouse to the bottom-right screen corner to show joystick

{% end %}

(Use the @fullerscreen@ template pack to create FullerScreen slide shows.)

{% end %} 

h1. Slide Show (S9) Template Pack Options (Cont'd)

{{ gradient navy silver navy silver }}

{% left %}

h2. What's S5?

Simple Standards-based Slide Show System (S5) -Eric Meyer's (of CSS fame) public domain (free, open source) slide show package inspired by Opera Show and others
that works in all modern browsers (without any plugin required
because it includes its own slide show machinery in JavaScript).

(Use the @s5blank@ or @s5themes@ template pack to create S5 slide shows.)

{% end %}

{% right %}

h2. What's S6?

S6 started as a rewrite of Eric Meyer's S5 using the jQuery JavaScript library -- offering easier to understand and easier to extend code. Add plugins, effects and more. Contributions welcome!

(Use the @s6blank@, @s6gradients@ or @s6syntax@ template pack to create S6 slide shows.)

{% end %}

h2. What's Slidy? What's Slippy? What's Google HTML5 Slides? 

Check the "Slide Show Template Gallery":http://slideshow.rubyforge.org/templates.html
for more template packs and samples.



h1. Gradient Themes Using "Loss-Free" Vector Graphics in S9 

{{ gradient red magenta red magenta }}

Firefox and Opera (and Chrome and Safari too) ship with built-in machinery for
 theming slide shows using "loss-free" vector  graphics. Offers "Flash/Silverlight-like" functionality out-of-the-box (no plugin download/installation required) using free web standards - a World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Recommendation known as - surprise, surprise 
 - Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG).


Creating a gradient theme is as easy as:

{{{
<linearGradient id="top_bottom" x1="0" y1="0" x2="0" y2="1">
  <stop offset="0%"   style="stop-color: red" />
  <stop offset="100%" style="stop-color: black" />
</linearGradient>
}}}

Note, S9 ships with nine predefined 
  gradient styles such as "Diagonal", "Radial Off Center", "Radial Repeat", "Top Bottom"
 and S9 lets you define your gradient themes in plain text. Example:

{{{
gradient: top-bottom red black
}}}

or:

{{{
gradient-colors: #0e1f5b #3b5998
}}}


h1. Gradient Themes Using "Loss-Free" Vector Graphics in S9 (Cont'd) 

{{ gradient yellow orange yellow orange }}

h3. CSS3 Background Gradients 

Using modern browser such as Firefox (3.6+), Chrome and Safari you can
now theme your slide shows using using "loss-free" vector
graphics in plain old CSS. Thanks to gradient support in backgrounds in CSS3.

For example, the linear gradient from top to bottom with four color is defined
in CSS3 as:

{{{
.gradient_yellow_orange {
  
  background: -webkit-gradient(linear, 0% 0%, 0% 100%,
                 from(yellow), to(orange),
                 color-stop(0.33,orange), color-stop(0.66,yellow));
  
  background: -moz-linear-gradient(top, yellow, orange, yellow, orange);
}
}}}

Using Slide Show (S9) you can use the @gradient@ helper that generates the CSS3
for you:

{{{
{{{{ gradient yellow orange yellow orange }}
}}}


h1. Turn Your Online Wiki Pages into Slide Shows - Sputnik Case Study

{{ gradient green lime green lime }}

Inspired by the Slide Show (S9) Ruby gem - Yuri Takhteyev has added S9-style slide shows
  to "Sputnik":http://sputnik.freewisdom.org/en/Slideshow_Demo - a wiki in Lua.

Lets you author slide shows online in your browser.
It's - surprise, surpise - a wiki and, thus, lets you
 work togther with others on a slide show, 
track changes and versions, link and get linked, and much much more.



h1. Thanks - Learn More - Questions? Comments?

{{ gradient blue silver blue silver }}

Gerald Bauer designed and developed the Slide Show (S9) Ruby gem. 
Find out more @ "slideshow.rubyforge.org":http://slideshow.rubyforge.org 

Questions? Comments? Send them along to the "Free Web Slide Show Alternatives - S5, S6, S9 And Friends - Forum/Mailing List":http://groups.google.com/group/webslideshow. Thanks!

{{ google_analytics code=UA-397343-10 }}